All together now!
There's a centipede on a peg...
and here's a...
leg!
Bravo, great!
There's an owl flying over the bed...
Everybody do the owl!
And here's the head!
Excellent, you're doing great.
There's a bee with a stinger...
and here's a...
finger!
Grześ, your finger!
Your finger.
Finger. Finger!
It's a piece of junk.
It was found near Kętrzyn,
in the Wolf's Lair.
Hitler's headquarters.
This tinklebox is a piece of history!
I've lived with him for years and still
don't know what he feels or thinks!
He wants to make contact with me,
tell me things, but doesn't know how.
He doesn't know anything!
But what he's come to understand
is that he wants to know everything.
He's sure damn curious of the world!
He's seen his brother do maths, biology
you know, school subjects!
And so it begins!
How am I supposed to explain to him,
if he doesn't understand a thing!
- He just doesn't get it!
- Make some space.
Go ahead and press it.
Go on.
No, press here.
He observed it somewhere.
He figured it out himself!
He did it all by himself.
It's a real lift, isn't it?
He sure has some engineering skills.
So I say: bloody hell,
they're making a mistake somewhere!
Who are you talking about?
The people at the disabled centre.
He learns there.
Come on, that's not proper learning!
Each duck makes a funny face
Dancing all around the place
Quack, quack, quack!
When the ducks do the swing
They shake their wings
And their rump...
Quack, quack, quack!
They keep telling us that there's
no bright future for Grześ!
That nothing can be done!
But I'm the one who lives with him.
Here's why we're looking for
a support teacher.
It has to be
a professional from outside.
One who's not entangled
in this whole system of relationships.
Also, one who can stand him.
And how many haven't?
Hoo-hoo!
Come here!
Come!
Hello, Grzesiek.
I'm Krystyna.
This is Michał.
And this is Grześ.
Let's go yum-yum!
Michał, please take him away!
Yum-yum!
Come on, Michał, help me...
See, this man is playing.
You see?
Let's listen, do you hear me?
Come on, let's go, let's listen.
Let's go.
Grzesiek, come on,
it's an old piece of junk!
It only takes up space!
Małgośka, help me!
Fuck!
Grzesiek?!
What do you think you're doing?!
Grześ,
take a look.
Do you know why I'm here?
It's because we will study together.
First we'll learn about each other.
You learn about me,
I learn about you.
Then we will learn
to count, to write...
I'll tell you
why the sun shines,
why the moon shines,
why one shines during the day,
why the other one shines at night...
I'll tell you...
Take it easy.
We've got time.
Grzesiek!
Grzesiek, come on.
Let's go back to our lesson.
Let's not get upset now,
because then I won't find out
what you're going on about,
and you won't learn anything.
Wait!
Grzesiu.
Look at me!
Look at me.
Are you listening to me?
New strings,
they're still unstable.
It will need to be retuned
two or three times.
When you play it afterwards...
I won't.
My son will.
He'll get over it.
He'll get over it soon.
Have you painted your whole hand?
All of it, properly?
Show me.
Now let's make a handprint,
let's press firmly.
This is your little finger.
Grześ?
Look at me and repeat.
Look at my lips.
Little!
Little.
Please repeat.
What's the finger like?
Grześ, what's the finger like?
Little.
Let's try again.
Look.
Large, medium...
little!
- Michał, you're disturbing us.
- You can always leave, Miss.
I can't, I'm working.
Grześ, look at me.
Grzesiek!
Hoo-hoo, neh-neh!
What happened?
Nothing!
Please focus
and let's try again.
Little.
Little finger.
Grzesiek!
Would you like to play?
Would you like to play the piano?
Would you like
to play the piano?
You would, right?
So pick up the sheet of paper.
Go ahead, pick it up from the floor.
Put it on the desk, here.
Pick up the sheet
from the floor and put it on the desk.
Instructions
assisted by gestures...
We'll go and play in a while,
wait a second.
Are something he understands,
he even complies with them.
But speaking to him with no gestures
just doesn't...
His hearing simply isn't
as it should be.
Do you really think
we didn't suspect it?
We've been visiting doctors for years.
Michał, have you washed your hands?
Łukasz,
they hit Michał with a ball.
- Again?
- So?
- They're taunting him as a lowlander.
- Or as one who's all thumbs!
But I'm asking you
what the doctors said.
The same thing.
He can hear, but he's autistic,
and autistic children don't react.
With all due respect,
I work with autistic children.
Perhaps this opinion about Grzesiek
is worth revising.
Medical certificate: autism,
April 1993.
When did you go
to Krakow with him? In 1996, 1997?
I don't remember.
This is from a neurologist,
another certificate:
Autism.
Now let's see: hearing.
Specialised Hearing Clinic,
here you go.
September 1996.
But what if you assumed
that Grześ is not autistic?
October 1998,
he had his hearing acoustics tested
in Nowy Targ.
All private visits,
it all cost money, 100 zlotys each.
What do we see written here?
Hearing: normal!
But could you please assume
that Grześ is not autistic?
Look here, in Rabka,
they referred us for an EEG.
At the Provincial Hospital,
in November...
Grześ, pick up the knife please.
Grześ!
Pick up the knife!
I'd have him examined again.
While he's asleep.
- While he's asleep?
- Yes, exactly.
Without involving his consciousness.
Try to close your eyes,
to calm down.
Close your eyes please.
Are you saying
that everyone was wrong?
No, I'm not.
What I'm saying is that your son
does perceive sound.
In the low registers.
He's autistic, that's true,
but he's not deaf!
He plays the piano
using not only the low ones...
In the high registers,
he feels vibrations,
which is sufficient for him
to play music, but...
it's not enough
to develop speech.
Please,
plug your ears now.
Come on,
do it.
Here you go.
And thus, for all these years,
he's been unable to hear the radio,
the telephone ringing,
or you, for that matter.
The concept of a “word”
has never crossed his mind.
Language, in fact, develops
by the age of five or six.
Today...
your son has his own world,
he somehow navigates it in his own way.
He lives an inner life.
Grzesiek?
Grzesiek...
Can you hear me?
That's right,
you're the one hearing this, Grześ.
It's your voice!
It's all right, Grzesiek.
Grzesiek!
It's all right.
Come, Grzesiek.
Michał!
Call Grzesiek!
- Hoo-hoo!
- No, wait.
No more “hoo-hoos”.
Go to him and say:
Grzegorz, dinner is served.
- Repeat after me.
- Łukasz!
- He won't understand him.
- Repeat after me.
Dinner is served.
No.
Grzegorz,
dinner is served.
- I'll go.
- Don't!
He has to learn his own name.
Grzegorz, dinner is served.
Dinner is served.
From now on, you'll address him
normally.
Like any other person.
And this person has a name.
What is it?
It's Grzegorz.
Hoo-hoo!
Grzegorz, dinner is served.
Grześ! Aaaa!
Dinner!
Is served!
Hoo-hoo!
Here's where you switch it off,
you press here
to fast-forward!
Here's rewind...
You stop it here.
You take it out like this.
You take it out!
My son is not handicapped,
although that's what we were told.
They deceived us!
They deceived us.
I'm not sure
if you were necessarily deceived.
I don't know that.
Krystyna,
you're really trying hard,
your intentions are good.
But don't defend them,
because I'll think you're in cahoots.
There's a lot of money that follows
this autistic Grześ of ours.
This money's not for Grzesiek.
It's not for us.
It's for them.
It didn't pay for them
to diagnose him correctly.
Inconceivable, isn't it?
That's right.
No!
We're the ones who are inconceivable.
That thing is normal.
Please help with the other one.
What am I supposed to do?
Shall I leave?
Echo!
Fuck!
He should be here today.
How will I do it?
I'll have him carried by helicopter,
and you'll reimburse me for it!
Sure!
No, the law does not define...
how many times,
how, or for how much
my kid will travel to school!
What's that?
How do I know this legal provision?
Just like that!
I have it at my fingertips!
That's right,
it's where you should have it too!
And if you don't,
get the right Journal of Laws
and read it!
You lack the elementary knowledge
required for your job!
Grzesiek!
Come here!
There's a school for the deaf.
Please go there.
I went there, they sent us back here.
What about Bydgoszcz?
He'll fit in there.
He doesn't fit
into any pigeonhole.
Including ours.
Our pigeonhole
is where blind children fit.
Grzesiek has high myopia,
degenerative changes in the retina,
no irises.
Look!
He's got dilated pupils,
nothing protects him from the light!
Mrs Płonka,
we both know,
that this is not about sight.
In his case, lack of hearing is key.
You want your child
to get the best possible care,
but your way isn't always the best!
I know it's hard for you.
You don't know anything,
you've never been in my position!
Grzesiek keeps asking me:
“Why can't I go to school?”
What am I supposed to tell him?
What am I supposed
to tell the boy?
That the system is dehumanized?
The system is made up of people!
People just like you!
And what does the system do?
The system closes the door
in front of us!
Only a human can open them!
And I'm asking you,
I'm begging you!
I'm not talking to the system,
but to a living human being!
Will you help us open the door?
Just a little bit!
A tiny bit!
We have something very interesting
to touch here.
What is it like?
Is it soft or hard?
Where do hens live?
In the henhouse!
Hens live in a henhouse, that's right.
And what do they do there?
- They lay eggs!
- They lay eggs. Correct!
And what shape does an egg have?
Grześ, our new friend...
Would you please tell me
what kind of shape eggs have?
- Is the egg square-shaped?
- Yes!
Think, Grześ.
Gulliver!
Don't play with your food.
Easy now.
Move a bit closer, Iwo.
Chin up!
Lift your fork up.
Mikołaj,
hand on the table, please.
Turn around,
feet facing this way.
Eat some more please.
Have some potatoes.
Grzegorz, are you okay?
Olaf, wait.
Tell me,
do you practice at home at all?
- Sure, I practice every day!
- No way, I can hear you don't do it.
I'm not lying, I do it,
but I play better at home.
No, Olaf, I think there is
a difference between this...
You surely hear that...
There's a lesson going on,
you're disturbing us!
Miss, he's deaf.
You can't talk to him.
You wanted to play something, didn't you?
Play then.
Don't be afraid.
Grześ.
I'm Alicja.
Play another piece, come on.
Don't be afraid.
Sonata.
So you play, do you?
Would you like to learn this Sonata?
- What happened to him?
- What do you think?
It's as simple as that.
He needed to go out and meet people!
Hello, Grześ.
Oh dear!
Show me
what you've learnt for today.
Wait a second,
take off your sunglasses first,
take off your backpack,
now you can start playing.
Easy, easy.
Nice!
Well done, Grześ!
You've got your right hand sorted!
Good then,
if your right hand is just fine...
today we're adding the other one.
Look at the keyboard.
Look here, Grześ.
That's all for now, OK?
- Sonata!
- No, we'll learn the Sonata later.
For now, we will
put this piece together. Take a look.
Only up to this point...
Come on Grześ, you don't want
to leave it like that, do you?
Let's learn all of it,
and afterwards we'll learn the Sonata.
Grześ.
Don't get offended!
All right,
I think I have an idea.
Where did this world come from
From what stars did it fall
Where did it all come from
The moon, myself and...
the world
I guess.
You ask me
But I
Know almost nothing
Maybe just that
Life's so beautiful to live.
Grzesiek, get up.
Get up, Grześ.
Grzesiek, get up!
Grzesiek!
Grześ!
This is...
a penis!
Penis!
- Penis...
- Very good.
You have a penis.
I don't.
Men have penises, women don't.
They have tits.
Breasts!
Women have breasts, because
they have babies and nurse them.
Men don't.
- Penis.
- Penis!
But you can call it differently.
"U"
Cook.
Cock!
Well done!
If he says “cock”,
don't listen to him.
Why not listen?
Grzesiek, listen to me!
Because people speak differently.
They call a frog
a toad.
Because apparently it's ugly.
The same goes for this.
Member...
dick...
Get it?
Dad has a penis?
Dad?
He does.
What for?
Because God wanted it that way.
S-ki...
Ski...
rt
Skirt.
Ti...
ghts
Tights!
Sun!
Moon!
Bravo!
Well done, Grześ!
I believe Grzesiek should
go to music school.
To music school!
You!
You'll go to music school!
Here we also have
music school, would you like to?
The teacher says you should!
You're supposed to go to music school!
- We also have a music school here.
- I know.
But to music school?
With his hearing?
And what's wrong with his hearing?
He played "Für Elise"
by ear, actually.
- It comes so easy to him...
- Stop playing now!
Stop!
- Grześ! Grześ!
- But he's not playing.
Close it.
I envy him for how
easy it comes to him.
Wait a sec,
could you please explain this to me.
Music school
is not just about the piano, right?
- Yes, they'll nag him with intervals.
- Grześ!
Grześ!
- Stop playing, OK?
- He's not playing!
Ms. Alicja
They barely tolerate him here.
Who are “they”?
The teachers! They can't teach him
how much two plus two is,
let alone the intervals.
- It's because they're messed up!
- Grzesiek!
You have to know
how to reach the child.
You can always work out a compromise,
you just need the will to do it.
Just look
how happy it makes him!
Mr Płonka, what do you say?
Would you like to be
a professional musician?
Musician!
Want to be one?
My impression is
that he comes here only to play music.
This happens so rarely.
So I thought:
if this child wants to play so badly,
and does play,
and makes progress,
then why not?
Let him go to music school.
But he's no longer a child.
Besides, sorry to say this,
but his intellectual level is low.
A music school's curriculum
is not easy.
All right,
he has a lot of catching up to do.
But in his case,
one should judge the heart.
As far as his hearing goes,
it's not that bad.
The hearing aid is not an obstacle.
I think you're perceiving his playing
through his whole background.
No, I'm not.
Don't you think
he hasn't reached that stage yet?
He's still learning everything.
I'm sorry, Grzesiek is waiting.
Maybe first
you should hear him play?
Fucking shitty system!
The system can't see bad hearing.
You didn't know for years
that it's hearing impairment, how?
Stop talking, Grzesiek!
It's your fault!
For f-...!
Why aren't you driving?
I have no time to waste time!
Already lost so much!
Drive!
So much time wasted...
It's your fault, you didn't see
it was hearing loss. So many years!
So many years...
Hello, Grześ.
Grześ...
speak to me.
Once you've learnt it,
let me know, OK?
And you know what?
You don't have to even
give a shit about them.
How do you want me to do this?
I'm supposed to teach music to someone
who can't hear?
The only thing he can't hear
are the two upper octaves.
Do you really believe...
do you believe that he'll play?
For fuck's sake!
Wait.
He believes.
And we believe
that someone can teach him.
So we can get him
admitted to music school.
What music school?!
Gośka!
You need to be proficient there!
It needs to be learnt
in due course.
And he's too old for that!
Besides, he can't hear!
Another thing, sheet music.
He can't read sheet music.
So? You'll teach him.
Maybe I could, but...
he can't understand
what I say to him.
Your moustache is too long.
Grześ understands better
if he can lip-read.
You can also write
on a piece of paper.
What do you care,
one hour a week?
Grześ!
We need to find the boy
something to do!
He has no friends,
no girlfriend, no classmates... nothing.
He doesn't read books,
doesn't watch anything... Grzesiek!
What's the guy supposed to do,
jerk off under the table?
We need to fill the time he has
with something, with a hobby.
That wasn't the same.
The same!
You've changed it a little.
Well this is...
better.
Let's write it down.
What for?
We'll write down the notes,
we'll sit down and look...
maybe find a way to improve things.
I don't know...
I don't play your notes,
I play music!
And music is better...
higher than some notes.
Notes...
Notes are like...
What are they for?
Do you know what the problem is?
You have plenty of keys,
and not too many fingers.
Sheet music is a logical notation.
Logic is important.
What?
Logic.
It's called “music”!
How come they hired this guy
to teach me to play?
Look here, billy-goat,
you will learn these notes.
I can assure you,
sure as shit you will.
What?
Crap.
This is...
C.
Bravo.
Excellent.
C for “cock”.
Very good.
Listen, and now...
this is C for “cock”,
so here... look!
Under the first line on the staff
there's...
use the white keys.
D.
D!
Cool!
D for "dick".
Grzesiek, come on.
He can't hear
the higher registers.
But he does have a sense of sound.
And despite all this, he wants
to attend our school?
That's right.
His dream is to be admitted.
For the time being,
he's taking private lessons.
So what does he need school for?
What did you need it for?
Grzegorz.
Taking into account your...
limitations, yes.
One can recognise
that how you play
is a certain achievement, but...
It will be an achievement once he gets
to perform at the concert hall.
At the concert hall?
Grzegorz,
our school
is not a place for you.
You will not attend our school.
The level he represents,
is the complete opposite
of what we expect and require.
And what do you require?
What do you require at this school?
Playing the notes one by one?
Grzesiek's case is different.
His music is alive.
It's all sentimental enough,
but we are being specific here.
He does not control his runs,
he has problems with the rhythm...
Do you realise
why he's playing this?
Because I was making pork chops!
Listen,
he connects with these sounds!
Won't you please listen?
- All right... he slows down, then speeds up...
- Meat mallet, breadcrumbs!
- He connects with the sounds...
- The problem is that he can't hear!
He simply can't hear.
And this disqualifies him.
There is something special about him.
Like what?
Headteacher...
What if he somehow
were able to hear
the two octaves he's lacking?
What would happen then?
This is the condition.
Even if he does start hearing,
we don't even know
what exactly it is he'll hear.
A hearing aid
boosts natural hearing.
An implant doesn't.
An implant replaces it,
just like a prosthesis replaces a leg.
But even the best prosthesis
won't replace a real limb.
But what do you mean by saying:
“if he does start hearing them”?
Just between you and me,
he may actually lose
rather than gain here.
He doesn't have much left to lose,
does he, Professor?
How many times
am I supposed to explain it to you?
It's possible you won't hear anything!
Got it? At all!
And then?
You won't be able to function at all!
- I will!
- No, you won't!
Leave me alone!
You don't get it!
You don't understand anything!
You don't understand
that I want to play?
OK then, you can go on
and learn to dig ditches!
You'll be working in drainage!
If you ever feel like playing, you can
beat the rhythm with your shovel!
- Here's what will happen!
There will be an operation!
- Do you want to lose your hearing?
- No!
- But you want to have an operation?
- Yes!
All right then!
Go on and have it!
Well!
So you agree with me.
You agree with me.
- Am I right then?
- No, you're not.
We argued so long,
so why do you say
I'm right then?
Just like that!
So does it mean you lied to me?
Grzesiek!
I didn't lie to you,
but if someone is unalterable...
unalterable,
and pigheaded and just wrong,
then what do you do?
You tell them:
All right then!
Because there's no other way!
With you,
Grzesiek, there's no other way!
So you lied to me!
You lied to me!
Don't say that.
Never talk to your mother like that,
do you hear me?
That's not even my mother!
Look, he hasn't even...
he hasn't even eaten.
Łukasz, give me the car keys.
- There is nothing for Grześ to eat.
- Have some wine, he'll manage.
I have a banana in the car boot.
I'll give it to him.
But he wants that.
And how do you explain it to him?
He says one thing, we say another.
I don't get it.
The other guy plays well,
but nobody listened to him.
I took a picture of you.
Show me.
I can't do it right now.
Why?
You have to wait two or three days.
Days?
I'll already be home by then.
Unless you visit us?
- Why not?
- Really?
Does this mean yes?
Awesome!
What are you making?
French fries.
And I'm making slices.
From the same potato.
And that's what we call interpretation.
This is what we will
be covering from now on.
Małołączniak,
Krzesanica, Ciemniak.
And now,
Bystra, Starorobociański,
Kominiarski Wierch.
And now check this out.
You can kiss my ass with
that sort of playing!
Look at this...
and at this.
You can't do it,
because you don't know!
Łukasz...
With someone of his age,
to place an implant
and try to obtain
strong auditory development
means venturing
into a great unknown.
And I think
that most doctors
working in my field
would not decide
to perform surgical treatment.
Excuse me, Professor,
but why do you think so?
There is a fear
that the patient
won't be able to benefit from it.
So why have you
decided to do it?
Why?
To allow the patient
to devote himself to music
and to practice
Beethoven's "Moonlight Sonata".
Professor,
which implant are you using?
Could you please stop talking?
This model
has a flexible,
12-channel electrode.
You will hear different sounds.
Rate how loud they are.
They fucking screwed it up.
Big time!
For once, could someone, finally,
fucking do something properly?!
For once, could you
stop blaming others?
For fuck's sake, how can I not
blame them if they screwed up!
We screwed up!
Blame us, blame yourself!
You've been brainwashed
so fucking nicely!
Stop the car!
Stop!
Stop, I'm telling you!
Why?
Because I fucking want you to!
Drink.
Have some tea.
Grześ!
Drink!
Łukasz.
Łukasz!
Where are you going?
- What?
- Where are you going?
Where do you think I can go?
I'm going out for a smoke.
Hold it!
Stop!
Sit down.
What time signature is it?
The time signature.
Don't clap, play.
Can you hear this?
You can?
Then why are you rushing?
- I'm not.
- I can hear you're rushing.
I can be here, I have time.
Can you hear me?
Do you understand me?
You're the one... wait.
You're the one who needs this school.
So you have to try harder.
More than ever before.
If I ask you why you're rushing,
it's not because
I want you to argue with me.
Let's start again.
And don't rush so much.
All right?
- OK.
- You understand me, right?
Yes.
Once again.
Good.
Good, now it's OK.
Don't speed up, stay like this.
Mom?
Did you count?
No, Grzesiek,
I didn't.
I listened to the music,
I didn't count the mistakes.
Grzesiek,
do you want to play?
If you want to play,
you have to stay there.
You need to make an effort,
otherwise it won't happen.
Grzesiek.
You've made a mistake!
Do you know where?
Grzesiek?
You don't, do you?
Okay.
Play the dominant's third
with your first finger.
- The first one?
- The major third.
With your first finger.
You know it's one of the outer fingers,
but you don't know which one.
- Can you count to five?
- Yes.
- Start counting then.
- One,
two,
three...
Not like that.
Give me your hand.
One...
- What?
- One...
two,
three,
four, five...
Great, well done.
Good, now play the dominant's third
with your first finger.
You'll never be a musician.
No playing at the concert hall for you.
- I will play there.
- Will you?
So play the fucking dominant's third
with your first finger!
Fucking hell, it's a madhouse!
Have you thought of a wish?
What is it?
You'll see!
I'll cut the cake then.
Someone wants to wish you
a happy birthday. Is it Grandma?
Hello?
Grzesiu?
Grzesiu, but...
Grzesiu, calm down!
What is it?
Grzesiu!
We won't take you away from the school.
Tell him
to take it easy at least today.
Grześ, just don't shout, please!
Grześ!
No, Grześ.
This is a good school.
I didn't lie to you, Grześ!
- Give me that phone.
- Give me the phone, Łukasz!
Well, why don't you unwrap it?
And?
Do you like them, son?
It's Michał's birthday!
Hello?
It's only once a year,
his bloody birthday!
Where are you heading so late at night?
You will get yourself killed!
I will kill them first!
I'm not going back there.
Grzesiek,
there are no other options.
- There have to be some.
- Sure, you know best.
You haven't looked everywhere!
We have.
We're simply out of options.
We need to keep searching!
You have to understand this!
We looked everywhere, really!
No place will accept you!
Not even Prague.
Fucking bullshit.
Fucking bullshit!
Damn it!
I'm fucking through with it!
- No more music.
- Łukasz...
That's it, it's over.
You don't want to go back there,
you don't have to!
But you won't attend
any other music school!
I don't want anyone in this house
mention any music school!
Grzesiek.
Grzesiek!
You did the right thing...
Dad.
Did you bring the coal?
Then shut up.
Fuck!
I'll bring it myself!
Grześ!
You're going through a crisis!
It happens to everyone!
It will pass!
Grzesiek!
Grzesiek, damn it!
Look.
You wanted to play and you're doing it.
It was your dream,
and you got it!
Look at you!
We're doing great.
No, you don't understand!
It's over!
What are you talking about?
It's not over!
What are you talking about?!
It's not over, Grzesiek!
You will attend
the bloody music school,
because I want you to, got it?
And I say when it's over!
I always do what you want!
Things are always done your way!
Grzesiek wants this or that,
whatever the hell it is!
In this house, nobody...
respects what I want!
Father doesn't give a damn,
Michał, you don't give a shit.
I wonder
how you'll cope once I'm gone.
Grześ!
We'll raise your volume a bit
in the high frequencies.
Has mom told you yet
that we're holding a festival?
A music festival!
For all people
with hearing impairments.
People like you.
With implants, Grzesiek.
She said something...
We want to show others
that once you get the implant
you are not only able to communicate,
but you also have dreams.
Cool, great.
Grześ,
why did we give you the implant?
What for?
So that you could play.
I'm sorry,
but I don't play anymore.
We already have
a lot of entries.
We're only waiting for yours.
I went to that
computer repair shop,
that's what they suggested
at the Labour Office.
Grzesiek knows a lot
about computer science.
Why not make use of it?
They agreed.
They gave him... oh!
Łukasz,
the pills!
They gave him computers
which they didn't have to fix ASAP.
He was happy,
he felt important.
And now what?
Two weeks and it's over.
They got rid of him,
because he was better than them.
Our son is a perfectionist.
As he got sucked into the topic,
he didn't let go.
But people
don't have time,
as long as it works, it's
good enough for them.
If I repaired watches like this...
So, you see...
you have to be careful with him.
Grzesiek doesn't believe in anything.
He no longer has any trust.
I connect very easily
with people suffering from disorders.
Please speak slowly and loudly.
This implant is not an ear.
Grzesiek,
Justyna is here to see you.
Justyna has arrived!
I'll make some tea.
Hello, Grześ.
I've got something for you!
Not attractive.
It could be in color.
Now they make them this way.
I can take color pictures of you.
If you want me to.
Now it's...
You were supposed to come long ago,
and you didn't.
Look at her, she only came now...
I know, you can be angry with me.
I'm really sorry,
I couldn't come earlier.
You promised.
If you can't keep your word,
why do you say that?
I was ill.
You can be ill for three days.
Five days,
I do not know, seven maybe.
Eight.
That's a week and a day.
A week and four days,
I don't know, two weeks,
but not for so long!
It doesn't work like that...
I have been suffering from paranoid
schizophrenia since I was eighteen.
Sit down at the piano, will you?
I'll take a picture of you.
Look here, girl!
You are late,
I'm not playing anymore!
If you had arrived earlier,
you'd have taken a hundred photos
But now...
Why aren't you playing?
You have no business here.
Thank you.
Goodbye!
Go on!
If you knew how not to come,
you know how to go home!
Would you like to teach me
to play the piano?
No, it's...
a waste of time.
Music only brings trouble.
What trouble?
All right.
I don't have the money anyway.
You know, it's because...
well...
the point is...
I wanted to learn...
to take pictures,
but I just don't have the money either.
Maybe you teach me and I teach you?
Grześ!
Hello!
You came to fetch me,
and I wouldn't have got off.
I'm such a featherbrain.
E
D sharp
B
No.
D sharp
E
B... Good!
I told you
you'd get there eventually.
And here we are!
Justynka, I made chicken.
Please join us.
I don't eat meat.
- E...
- But it will get cold.
She doesn't eat meat!
She doesn't eat meat, just like that.
E
D sharp
- E-D sharp-E...
- There's some rice with vegetables.
Get out!
Don't you get it?!
Where are we?!
Is this a house or a brothel!
Once again...
E
D sharp
-B
What do we have here?
D
Let's slide down.
Look, it's like a slide.
You OK?
It's not such a big slide...
Not a big one.
That will be something.
There's a horse.
It's more like...
a pancake.
An uneven pancake, but...
maybe a horse, I don't know.
Maybe a pancake.
They are clouds, you know.
After all...
they are clouds.
With what?
With jam.
Let's move in together.
He has changed thanks to you.
And you're looking for people...
who can relieve you of your burden.
No, I'm not.
You need to know
that I might hurt him.
Even unintentionally.
Grześ!
Justynka is here to see you.
No, no, no.
You couldn't pick up the phone,
but you could have called back.
Maybe I had something
very important to tell you.
I started playing again for you,
after not playing for a long time.
And don't apologise,
justice will be done to you anyway.
You'll get the punishment
that you deserve!
You're not God,
you can't punish me.
Don't apologise.
I don't need you anymore
and you can leave.
You can get out of this house!
Admit it, you're a fraud.
You're a fraud,
and I had a present for you.
Because I am good to you.
For you I have learnt to play
the most beautiful piece
ever created in this world:
"The Moonlight Sonata"!
It's played as if the moon
reflected itself in a lake
and now I see
that the lake is full of tears!
Go on, you can leave now
and never come back!
You didn't deserve it anyway!
Show me where to cut it,
you choose!
We can't give you more time.
That wouldn't be fair
towards the others.
We had a deal: three minutes, right?
- Did we have a deal? We did.
- You don't get it...
You don't get it.
You can't perform unless you meet
all the criteria.
It's as simple as that.
You're not performing!
So, what will it be?
Three minutes?
Three.
Put it on.
OK?
Come here!
This was Natalia Jasińska.
She sang an old song
from the Kurpie region.
And here's another competitor
from Poland.
He can hear thanks to an implant
with a flexible
Today, he will perform for you
a part of the first movement
of "the Moonlight Sonata"
by Ludwig van Beethoven.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Grzegorz Płonka.
Grzegorz Płonka won
the festival Beats of Cochlea.
After that the world heard of him.
Two years later, at the age of 29,
Grzegorz graduated from music school.